# Shortest Unsorted Continuous Subarray

**LeetCode: https://leetcode.com/problems/shortest-unsorted-continuous-subarray/**

## Description

Given an integer array, you need to find one **continuous subarray** that if you only sort this subarray in ascending order, then the whole array will be sorted in ascending order, too.

You need to find the **shortest** such subarray and output its length.

**Example 1:**

```
Input: [2, 6, 4, 8, 10, 9, 15]
Output: 5
Explanation: You need to sort [6, 4, 8, 10, 9] in ascending order to make the whole array sorted in ascending order.
```

**Note:**

1. Then length of the input array is in range [1, 10,000].
2. The input array may contain duplicates, so ascending order here means **<=**.

## Solution1: Naive solution by sorting

The original problem is asking for the shortest subarray that needs to be sorted in order to make the whole input array sorted. Assume `nums` is the input array with length `n`,`nums_sorted` is the sorted version of `nums`, `nums[left, right]`(both indices inclusive) is such a subarray of the shortest length. Since we only need to sort `nums[left, right]` in order to transform `nums` into `nums_sorted`, all other elements in `nums` are left intact, which means the subarray `nums[0, left - 1]` will be exactly the same as subarray `nums_sorted[0, left - 1]`, and the subarray `nums[right + 1, n - 1]` exactly the same as `nums_sorted[right + 1, n - 1]`. We can also conclude `nums[left] != nums_sorted[left]` and `nums[right] != nums_sorted[right]`. Otherwise the subarray `nums[left, right]` will not be the shortest (for example, if `nums[left] == nums_sorted[left]`, sorting `nums[left + 1, right]` will also render `nums` sorted).

Therefore, the shortest subarray can be constructed as follows: its leftmost index can be obtained by finding the **first** index at which the two elements of `nums` and `nums_sorted` are different while its rightmost index can be obtained by finding the **last** such index.

### Java

```java
public int findUnsortedSubarray(int[] nums) {
    int n;
    if (nums == null || (n = nums.length) < 2) return 0;
    int[] nums_sorted = Arrays.copyOf(nums, n);
    Arrays.sort(nums_sorted);

    int left = 0, right = n - 1;
    while(left < n && nums[left] == nums_sorted[left]) left++;
    while(right > left && nums[right] == nums_sorted[right]) right--;

    return right - left + 1;
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

The straightforward way for finding the two boundary indices would be comparing elements from `nums` and `nums_sorted` one by one. But we need to construct `nums_sorted` from `nums` first. 

#### Space Complexity

`O(n)`.

#### Time Complexity

`O(nlogn)`.

## Solution2: `O(n)` time two-pass solution

It turns out that the two boundary indices `left` and `right` can be found in linear time, if we take advantage of the following three properties:

1. `nums[0, left - 1]` and `nums[right + 1, n - 1]` are both sorted.
2. `nums[left] != nums_sorted[left]` and `nums[right] != nums_sorted[right]`.
3. `nums[left - 1] <= min` and `max <= nums[right + 1]`, where `min` and `max` are the minimum and maximum values of subarray `nums[left, right]`.

The first and third properties guarantee that the subarray `nums[0, left - 1]` will be exactly the same as subarray `nums_sorted[0, left - 1]`, and the subarray `nums[right + 1, n - 1]` exactly the same as `nums_sorted[right + 1, n - 1]`, while the second property ensures that `left` will be the **first** index at which the two elements of `nums` and `nums_sorted` are different and `right` be the **last** such index.

Since we aim at the shortest subarrays, from the first property alone, we need to find the two longest sorted subarrays starting at index `0` and ending at index `n - 1`, respectively. Assume the two subarrays are `nums[0, l]` and `nums[r, n - 1]`. If there is overlapping between these two subarrays, i.e.`l >= r`, then the whole array is sorted so `0` will be returned. Otherwise, the input array is not sorted. However, we cannot say sorting `nums[l, r]` will leave the whole array sorted, because at this moment the third property may not be satisfied.

To guarantee the third property, assume `min` and `max` are the minimum and maximum values of subarray `nums[l, r]`, then we need to keep `l--` as long as `l > 0 && nums[l - 1] > min`, and keep `r++` as long as `r < n - 1 && nums[r + 1] < max`. After this is done, it can be shown that the second property will be met automatically, and `nums[l, r]` will be the shortest subarray.

Finding the longest subarrays and the maximum and minimum values of the middle subarray takes one-pass. Ensuring the third property requires a second pass. Therefore we have this two-pass solution:

### Java

```java
public int findUnsortedSubarray(int[] nums) {
    int n;
    if (nums == null || (n = nums.length) < 2) return 0;
    int l = 0, r = n - 1;

    // `nums[0, l - 1]` and `nums[r + 1, n - 1]` are both sorted.
    while (l < r && nums[l] <= nums[l + 1]) l++;
    if (l >= r) return 0;
    while (nums[r - 1] <= nums[r]) r--;

    // find the minimum `min` and maximum `max` values of subarray `nums[l, r]`
    int max = Integer.MIN_VALUE, min = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    for (int i = l; i <= r; i++) {
        max = Math.max(max, nums[i]);
        min = Math.min(min, nums[i]);
    }
    while (l > 0 && nums[l - 1] > min) l--;
    while (r < n - 1 && nums[r + 1] < max) r++;

    return r - l + 1;
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(1)`. Constant space is used.

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`.

## Solution3: `O(n)` time one-pass solution

To understand this one-pass solution, we need to introduce some equivalent mathematical models for describing a sorted array (assuming in ascending order). Suppose the given array is `nums` with length `n`, these models are as follows:

1. `nums[k] <= nums[k + 1]` for all `0 <= k < n - 1`.
2. `nums[k] == max[k]` for all `0 <= k <= n - 1`, where `max[k]` is the maximum value of the subarray `nums[0, k]`.
3. `nums[k] == min[k]` for all `0 <= k <= n - 1`, where `min[k]` is the minimum value of the subarray `nums[k, n - 1]`.

The first model is the most common one (and probably the most familiar one) while the last two are less common. It's easy to show that the second model is equivalent to the first by noting that for any index `k < n - 1`, we have `max[k] <= max[k + 1]`, then `nums[k] = max[k] <= max[k + 1] = nums[k + 1]`. Similar results hold for the third model: `nums[k] = min[k] <= min[k + 1] = nums[k + 1]`.

With these models in place, we can show that if indices `i` and `j` satisfy the following conditions, then `nums[i, j]` will be the shortest subarray we are looking for:

1. `i` is the **smallest** index such that `nums[i] != min[i]`;
2. `j` is the **largest** index such that `nums[j] != max[j]`.

The proof proceeds by showing that the two conditions above are equivalent to the three properties in part **II**.

Firstly we will show that the first property in part **II** is held true. From condition `1`, we have `nums[k] == min[k]` for all `0 <= k < i`. Then `nums[k] = min[k] <= min[k + 1] = nums[k + 1]` for all `k < i - 1`. By definition, `nums[0, i - 1]` is sorted. Similarly from condition `2`, `nums[k] == max[k]` for all `j < k <= n - 1`. Then `nums[k] = max[k] <= max[k + 1] = nums[k + 1]` for all `j < k < n - 1`. By definition, `nums[j + 1, n - 1]` is sorted.

Then we will show the third property is satisfied. Let `min_m` and `max_m` be the minimum and maximum values of subarray `nums[i, j]`, respectively, then we have `min_m >= min[i] >= min[i - 1] = nums[i - 1]` and `max_m <= max[j] <= max[j + 1] = nums[j + 1]`.

Lastly we will show that the second property is also valid. Note that if the first and third properties are both true, then we know the subarray `nums[0, i - 1]` will be exactly the same as subarray `nums_sorted[0, i - 1]`, and the subarray `nums[j + 1, n - 1]` exactly the same as `nums_sorted[j + 1, n - 1]`. In this case just suppose we have `nums[i] == nums_sorted[i]`and `nums[j] == nums_sorted[j]`, let's see what will happen. Since the subarrays `nums[i, n - 1]` and `nums_sorted[i, n - 1]` contain exactly the same elements (though the order may be different), then the minimum element of the former will be the same as the latter. Since `nums_sorted[i, n - 1]` is sorted in ascending order, we will have `min[i] = nums_sorted[i] = nums[i]`, which contradicts the assumption that `nums[i] != min[i]`. Similarly we can show that `nums[j] == nums_sorted[j]` implies `nums[j] == max[j]`, which contradicts the assumption that `nums[j] != max[j]`.

Finding the smallest index `i` such that `nums[i] != min[i]` and the largest index `j` such that `nums[j] != max[j]` can be done in one-pass, as shown below. Note that we don't really need arrays to hold values for `min[r]` and `max[l]`, by taking advantage of the recurrence relation `min[r] = Math.min(min[r + 1], nums[r])` and `max[l] = Math.max(max[l - 1], nums[l])`. Also we initialized the indices `i` and `j` such that correct results will be returned even if the input array is already sorted (which requires initially `j - i + 1 = 0`).

### Java

```java
public int findUnsortedSubarray(int[] nums) {
    int n;
    if (nums == null || (n = nums.length) < 2) return 0;

    int i = 0, j = -1;
    int max = Integer.MIN_VALUE, min = Integer.MAX_VALUE;
    for (int l = 0, r = n - 1; r >= 0; l++, r--) {
        if (nums[l] >= max) {
            max = nums[l];
        } else {
            j = l;
        }

        if (nums[r] <= min) {
            min = nums[r];
        } else {
            i = r;
        }
    }

    return j - i + 1;
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(1)`.Constant space is used.

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`.