# Two Sum II - Input Array is Sorted

**LeetCode: https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum-ii-input-array-is-sorted/**

## **Description**

Given an array of integers that is already **sorted in ascending order**, find two numbers such that they add up to a specific target number.

The function twoSum should return indices of the two numbers such that they add up to the target, where index1 must be less than index2.

**Note:**

- Your returned answers (both index1 and index2) are not zero-based.
- You may assume that each input would have *exactly* one solution and you may not use the *same* element twice.

**Example:**

```
Input: numbers = [2,7,11,15], target = 9
Output: [1,2]
Explanation: The sum of 2 and 7 is 9. Therefore index1 = 1, index2 = 2.
```

## Solution1: Brute Force

The brute force approach is simple. Loop through each element *x* and find if there is another value that equals to *target - x*.Becasue the given array is sorted,so we just handle with those elements which no more than the target. 

### Java

```java
public int[] twoSum(int[] numbers, int target) {
    for (int i = 0; i < numbers.length && numbers[i] <= target; i++) {
        for (int j = i + 1; j < numbers.length && numbers[i] <= target; j++) {
            if (numbers[j] == target - numbers[i]) {
                return new int[]{i + 1, j + 1};
            }
        }
    }
    return new int[]{0, 0};
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(1)`. 

#### Time complexity

`O(n^2)`. For each element, we try to find its complement by looping through the rest of array which takes `O(n)` time. Therefore, the time complexity is `O(n^2)`.

## Solution2: Two Pointers

Without HashMap, just have two pointers,left points the given array index from 0, right points the given array index from numbers.length - 1, **shrink the scope** based on the comparison between sum(sum = numbers[left] + numbers[right]) and target.If `sum == target`,we return an array contains left and right;else if `sum < target`,we let `left--`;else we let `right--`.

### Java

```java
public int[] twoSum(int[] numbers, int target) {
    int left = 1;
    int right = numbers.length - 1;
    while(left < right) {
        int sum = numbers[left] + numbers[right];
        if(sum == target) {
            return new int[]{left + 1, right + 1};
        } else if(sum < target) {
            left++;
        } else {
            right--;
        }
    }

    return new int[2];
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(1)`. 

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`.We iterate the array once, since at each step we move either left or right pointer one position.