# Two Sum IV - Input is a BST

**LeetCode: https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum-iv-input-is-a-bst/** 

## **Description**

Given a Binary Search Tree and a target number, return true if there exist two elements in the BST such that their sum is equal to the given target.

**Example 1:**

```
Input: 
    5
   / \
  3   6
 / \   \
2   4   7

Target = 9

Output: True
```

 **Example 2:**

```
Input: 
    5
   / \
  3   6
 / \   \
2   4   7

Target = 28

Output: False
```

**Note:**

There are no same elements in a BST.

## Solution1: Using HashSet

The simplest solution will be to traverse over the whole tree and consider every possible pair of nodes to determine if they can form the required sum `target`. But, we can improve the process if we look at a little catch here.

If the sum of two elements `x + y` equals `target`, and we already know that `x` exists in the given tree, we only need to check if an element `y` exists in the given tree, such that `y = target - x`. Based on this simple catch, we can traverse the tree in both the directions(left child and right child) at every step. We keep a track of the elements which have been found so far during the tree traversal, by putting them into a set.

For every current node with a value of `p`, we check if `target - p` already exists in the array. If so, we can conclude that the sum `target` can be formed by using the two elements from the given tree. Otherwise, we put this value `p` into the set.

If even after the whole tree's traversal, no such element `p` can be found, the sum `target` can't be formed by using any two elements.

```java
public boolean findTarget(TreeNode root, int target) {
    Set <Integer> set = new HashSet();
    return find(root, target, set);
}
public boolean find(TreeNode root, int target, Set <Integer> set) {
    if (root == null)
        return false;
    if (set.contains(target - root.val))
        return true;
    set.add(root.val);
    return find(root.left, target, set) || find(root.right, target, set);
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(n)`. The size of the set can grow upto `n` in the worst case.

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`.  The entire tree is traversed only once in the worst case. Here, `n` refers to the number of nodes in the given tree.

## Solution2: Using BFS and HashSet

In this approach, the idea of using the set is the same as in the last approach. But, we can carry on the traversal in a Breadth First Search manner, which is a very common traversal method used in Trees. The way BFS is used can be summarized as given below. We start by putting the root node into a queue. We also maintain a set similar to the last approach. Then, at every step, we do as follows:

1. Remove an element, p, from the front of the queue.
2. Check if the element `target - p` already exists in the set. If so, return True.
3. Otherwise, add this element, p to the set. Further, add the right and the left child nodes of the current node to the back of the queue.
4. Continue steps 1. to 3. till the queue becomes empty.
5. Return false if the queue becomes empty.

By following this process, we traverse the tree on a level by level basis.

```java
public boolean findTarget(TreeNode root, int target) {
    Set <Integer> set = new HashSet();
    Queue <TreeNode> queue = new LinkedList();
    queue.add(root);
    while (!queue.isEmpty()) {
        if (queue.peek() != null) {
            TreeNode node = queue.remove();
            if (set.contains(target - node.val))
                return true;
            set.add(node.val);
            queue.add(node.right);
            queue.add(node.left);
        } else
            queue.remove();
    }
    return false;
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(n)`. The size of the set can grow at most upto `n`.

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`. We need to traverse over the whole tree once in the worst case. Here, `n` refers to the number of nodes in the given tree.

## Solution3: Inorder Traversal

In this approach,we convert the given BST into a sorted sequence by inoder traversal.Then we can use two pointers approach to resolve the question.

```java
public void inorder(TreeNode root, List<Integer> list) {
    if (root == null) {
        return;
    }
    inorder(root.left, list);
    list.add(root.val);
    inorder(root.right, list);
}

public boolean findTarget(TreeNode root, int target) {
    List<Integer> list = new ArrayList<>();
    inorder(root, list);

    int left = 0, right = list.size() - 1;
    while (left < right) {
        int sum = list.get(left) + list.get(right);
        if (sum == target) {
            return true;
        } else if (sum < target) {
            left++;
        } else {
            right--;
        }
    }
    return false;
}
```

### Complexity Analysis

#### Space complexity

`O(n)`. The sorted list will contain `n `elements.

#### Time complexity

`O(n)`. We need to traverse over the whole tree once to do the inorder traversal. Here, `n` refers to the number of nodes in the given tree.